---
permalink: /101/
title: "Bitcoin 101"
defaults:
  # _pages
  - scope:
      path: "Bitcoin 101"
      type: pages
    values:
      layout: single
      author_profile: true
---

## What is Bitcoin?
Bitcoin is  a new kind of money. It creates, holds, and transfers value using cryptographic equations and codes to ensure that transactions can only be completed once.

One of Bitcoin’s most important characteristics is that it is decentralized using peer-to-peer technology—meaning no single institution can control the Bitcoin network.

You should read the Bitcoin Whitepaper

## Who created Bitcoin?
Bitcoin was created by Satoshi Nakamoto. No one knows who Satoshi Nakomoto is. But he, she, or they had a vision for a new kind of currency in 2008, one that would change the world.













This new currency – or cryptocurrency – would not be centrally controlled by any one business or government.

They called it Bitcoin, and it was a radically new way to transact and store value all around the world.

Bitcoin holds its value because there’s a limited amount out there, kinda like a nugget of gold or silver.

Powerful computer networks created each unique Bitcoin by using very complex math. This is called mining!

A new kind of database, the Blockchain, validates that each Bitcoin exists – and confirms its rightful owner.

But how do you even get Bitcoin? Well, you buy it from specialized exchanges that have it in stock.

Similar to gas prices, Bitcoin prices can change a lot over time as supply and demand go up and down.

But where do you even keep all your Bitcoin? Some choose to store it on their computer or even in the cloud.

Regardless of where you keep it, your Bitcoin is pretty valuable. So make sure to keep it safe.

Over the years, the price of a Bitcoin has gone up a lot. However, you can own as small of a slice as you want.

That’s a lot to imagine, isn’t it? One thing is clear though: Satoshi’s vision is having an impact all around the world.